This moment was one of the most
suspenseful I'd seen in a movie in
years. The character Chase Infinity is
waiting for someone to come around that
corner, and the entire
$130 million star-studded action-packed
blockbuster has built towards the
dramatic question, what will happen when
they do? So, it might surprise you to
learn that going into shooting this
scene, the actors and the director
didn't really know what would happen. I
I I have to admit that we went into this
movie without that as our ending. We
knew that all our participants were
headed to the desert and exactly how it
was all going to go down was unclear to
us. The director not knowing how a film
of this scale is going to end as he's
shooting it might sound a little insane.
But far from being irresponsible, I
think this is all just a result of Paul
Thomas Anderson's unique approach to
filmm and storytelling. An approach that
I think makes his films some of the most
unique American films of the last few
decades. an approach that has crafted
some of my favorite endings in cinema
and one that helps him consistently
capture amazing performances. But what
is that approach? What is Paul Thomas
Anderson doing that makes one battle
after another feel so different from
every other blockbuster we've seen
recently?
To answer this question, let's rewind a
little to the car chase that happens
earlier. And if you haven't seen the
movie, don't worry. I'll warn you before
I spoil anything.
I've already seen some people calling
this one of the best car chases in
modern cinema,
and I'd agree. But what exactly makes it
so good? Certainly, part of the novelty
is the location. The almost nauseating
waving hills create visual suspense and
are unlike anything we've seen in a car
chase before. Some of it, of course, is
the good filmmaking, the way the sound
design and cinematography bring you into
the physicality of the chase.
Notice how a lot of things kind of shake
the way they would if you were really
filming a high-speed chase in a car. But
I'd argue that those elements are
secondary to the real reason the entire
chase. And even a fairly static shot
like this feels exciting and
suspenseful. Nobody's going to a movie
to look at a road. You know what I mean?
It's like the one thing that we all look
at are the people in a movie. It's so
obvious, but it maybe it bears
repeating. It's like no one cares about
the cars. They care about the people.
>> Anderson isn't just talking here about
showing the people driving the cars.
Although that's an important part of
filming a chase. He's talking about how
the entire reason we even care about the
outcome of this chase, the thing fueling
the conflict, drama, and creating
suspense in this sequence is the
relationships between the human
characters in the cars. It's the only
thing that people care about. Maybe I
shouldn't be that I should say it's the
only thing I care about. This focus on
relationships is not just PTA's approach
to A Card Chase, but represents his
entire storytelling ethos. No matter
what subject he's covering, what themes
he's exploring, or what period his film
is set in, the one thing he's
hyperfocused on is the people in his
films and their relationships to each
other. When he tells the story of a
Scientology-like cult in the Master,
there's so many ways you could approach
telling that story, but Anderson focuses
on one specific relationship between the
cult leader and one of his followers,
and the entire drama of the film hinges
on their unique sort of lovehate
relationship. The whole film builds
towards a final confrontation between
these two characters. Not where they're
fighting or chasing each other, but
where they have a conversation. This is
a recurring type of scene in his work
I'll call the relational showdown.
When he makes a movie about capitalism,
the oil industry in the American West,
again, you could approach that story in
so many ways, but he distills the
conflict down to the relationship
between a father and his adopted son,
and these two rivals, a ruthless
businessman and a preacher, and the ways
they both try to use each other's power
for their own gain. Again, the entire
film builds towards one final relational
showdown between these two characters.
[music]
When he makes a movie about an obsessive
artist, he chooses to do so by examining
the relationship between that artist and
his muse and their battle for control
and power in that relationship.
Again, building the entire movie towards
a final relational confrontation between
them.
And before you jump in and say, "Yeah,
that's just good writing. Every great
story focuses on the characters." Not
every film is like this. Yes, character
is screenwriting 101. But often the
characters are trying to overcome
specific external obstacles to resolve
the conflict. For example, we care about
the characters in Jaws, but the dramatic
climax of the film is in their
confrontation with a man-eating shark.
We already know how the two sides of
this conflict relate to each other. The
big question for us is who will win.
[music]
Compare that to most PTA films where the
dramatic climax happens not in action
but in a conversation where we might be
asking ourselves who will win but where
we're probably wondering not who's going
to win the fight but if the characters
are even going to fight, if they'll
treat each other like enemies or make up
and become allies. [music]
This is a big part of what's going on in
one battle after another. Presumably,
he's making a movie about American
politics, revolutionaries, fascism, and
immigration. But just like with most of
his other movies, what he's really
mostly focused on are a few core human
relationships at the center of all of
that.
>> Thank you.
>> You're hung over and you got home at
3:00 in the morning. That doesn't mean
that the themes and conflict of the
larger setting in his films are
irrelevant, but we should keep in mind
when we're trying to understand his work
that the lens he's using to examine any
setting or theme is almost always that
of a relationship at the center of the
story and how the conflict of the
setting manifests within those
relationships. Anderson, of course, is
not the first or only filmmaker to use
relationships or the meeting between two
characters as the dramatic climax for
the film, but he does this consistently
and with a unique intensity that I think
few other directors achieve. His films
often center on relationships where
deeply flawed or problematic characters
are drawn together despite being
incredibly toxic for each other. Or he
focuses on characters that have some
kind of bond, but where larger forces
seem to be pushing them apart. He's
interested in examining the ways in
which human relationships seem to defy
logic and frequently builds an entire
film towards a scene where the central
relationship is what's at stake. Okay,
but how did he end up not knowing how
this movie would end? To understand
that, we need to first look at his
approach to working with actors. I'm a
little unclear as to what the plan is. I
need some direction.
>> Don't be unclear. One of the best
characters in the entire film is Sergio,
played by Benio Del Toro. And a huge
part of what makes this character so fun
to watch is simply the character's
relaxed energy in contrast with Bob's
frantic anxiety.
>> Whoa, what's going on? Can you
>> According to Anderson in interviews,
most of that big sequence that Del Toro
is a part of was improvised. He says
that Del Toro brought a lot of ideas to
this section and that the main piece of
direction that Del Toro himself asked
Anderson to give was simply to make sure
he didn't accidentally start matching
Bob's frantic anxiety.
>> Courage, Bob. Courage.
>> It's always impossible to know entirely
who gets credit for what in a film
unless you were there on set, but from
how this is described, it sounds like
most of the character we see on the
screen in the film was created by Del
Toro. Anderson's role here seems to be
less writing and crafting this character
and more simply setting the stage for
this character to exist and facilitating
capturing the scene on camera. I don't
think if you're an actor in a scene and
you show up to work one day, I tell you
where to stand and I tell you to go over
here and I tell you to go over there
that you're going to feel very collabor
with this kind of light touch.
>> It's important to walk in with a plan.
obviously,
but it's equally as important to be
flexible on that plan.
>> Even the way Anderson shoots with a
small crew and minimal lighting is
geared towards giving the actors as much
flexibility as possible.
>> Sorry, man.
>> You have to walk in open to everything
[music] and be ready to see something
new. You might be ready to shoot here,
but you also have to be ready to turn
around and shoot this way. Again, I have
to say PTA is not the only or first
director to give actors this amount of
freedom, but he does so to a surprising
degree. And you start to realize how
unique that approach is when you combine
his collaborative spirit with just how
much he lets the characters define the
story for him. Even starting with the
writing process, I try as hard as I can
to not do the writing, to let the
character do the writing. So hopefully
you're getting into a state of kind of
autohypnosis where the characters are
kind of doing making choices and things
are happening to them um that can
eventually formulate a story. It's an
attempt at a type of creativity that
isn't consciously moving towards a
predefined outcome, but is instead
guided by some underlying creative
instinct or intuition emerging out of a
collaboration between the actor,
director, and character. And it's a big
part of why I think I love PTA's films.
They always feel unpredictable and alive
to me. But when you're allowing the
characters themselves to drive the
story, and you want to leave space for
those characters to be developed in
collaboration with the actors throughout
the process and on set, you end up in
some unexpected places, and it can lead
you to some tricky situations.
And this is where I can't go any further
without major spoilers. So, if you
haven't seen the film yet, come back
after you do.
So, why didn't Anderson know what would
happen in this moment? Well, as he said,
they knew they were going to send all
these characters into the desert for a
showdown, that Bob would be trying to
rescue Willa from Lockjaw and the
Christmas Adventurers, and that Willow
would be trying to escape. But they
didn't know how any of that would play
out. In the conventional Hollywood
version of the story where Bob Ferguson
is the protagonist and the hero,
obviously you'd have him come in, shoot
somebody, and save the day. And for a
while, that was sort of the plan.
>> If you take the traditional route,
inevitably that father is going to have
to shoot somebody to shoot somebody else
to save the daughter, right? That's how
this stuff's supposed to go.
>> But then DiCaprio and the character had
other ideas. Leo was so strong in
forming a character that really was
going to be incapable of shooting
somebody properly, right? That we have
to follow that and we have to kind of
address that each step of the way. Say
realistically, what is plausibly
what could Bob take care of? So if Bob
can't save the day, then who does? Does
Willa just die? Apparently, they briefly
considered darker versions, but you have
this daughter of two very militant
fighters. So, it makes a lot of sense
within the logic of her character that
she would be capable of doing the
shooting and saving herself. But then
what happens when Willa and Bob meet
back up? So, you set up the scene and
you try shooting an ending.
Will
But it doesn't feel quite right. In an
interview with Rolling Stone, Anderson
said he watched back the first version
they shot in the dailies that night and
he said, "Hang on, there's more here. I
mean, she's just learned that this guy
was her real dad. That her mom was not
exactly the uncomplicated hero that she
thought she was. She's just had her
entire life abruptly torn apart and
threatened by her biological father.
Would she even trust this guy anymore?
Who even is he? So, they went back and
did it again, discovering the version we
see in the final film.
>> Will Greenacres Beverly Hillies in
Hooterville Junction?
>> No, no, baby. It's me, Will. It's me.
>> Green Acres, Beverly Hill BILLIES IN
HOOTERVILLE JUNCTION. [screaming]
>> OKAY. OKAY. And I'm glad they did
because that scene is the one I find the
most interesting in the entire movie. It
captures so much about the way the
larger political turmoil in our country
seeps into our individual relationships,
even close family bonds. And it's in
that moment where for me, Willa really
starts to feel like she has some agency
and is the hero of the story. Like any
good PTA ending, I find it hard to
articulate exactly what it means, but it
feels true to these characters. It feels
like if these characters were real
people, I'm watching what they would
have actually done in this scenario. And
I like not quite knowing what it means
because if you tie everything in your
film into easily identifiable symbolism,
a clear allegory or neat message, then
the film ends there. I know what it says
and I walk away and can forget about it.
But for me, with one battle after
another, like with There Will Be Blood,
The Master, and Phantom Thread, I'm
stuck thinking about this movie, mulling
it over and wondering what it means. I'm
compelled to return to it, and I see
something new in it every time. There's
something about these endings that are
messy and a little illogical in the way
human relationships are. Working this
way requires a lot of trust. It requires
the director to trust the actors. It
requires the actors to trust the
director to lead them towards something
good, even if it's not already all
mapped out in the script. It requires
trusting that there's a value in
allowing the characters themselves to
inform where the story will go, rather
than just trying to push the story into
where you think it should go. This
livewire form of storytelling isn't
inherently the best. There are plenty of
other directors who work in exactly the
opposite way, intricately mapping out
every line of dialogue and shot before
the movie even starts. And those kind of
directors have also made a lot of great
movies that I like. But Anderson's
approach offers a lot of freedom to
actors that creates some incredibly
compelling and complicated characters on
screen and gives actors a lot of room to
really find something fascinating and
compelling in performance. But it's not
for everybody because it's inevitably
going to take the story to some unusual
places. It's not going to fit into
conventional narrative structure. But
often art that is made with this kind of
freedom and collaborative discovery is
the art that I find the most interesting
to look at and return to. And getting to
see that approach in a film of this
scale is a rare treat.
This video was brought to you by Movie,
an online handcurated streaming cinema
with incredible movies from all around
the world. Die My Love, their latest
film directed by Lynn Ramsay, has been
in theaters, and you'll be able to catch
that on movie soon. But right now in the
US, you can go back and watch one of my
favorites of her previous films. We need
to talk about Kevin. If you like the
kind of weird, dark, human drama that we
see in a lot of Paul Thomas Anderson
films, I think you'll like Lynn Ramsay's
work a lot. What I love most about Movie
is their dedication to hand curation.
So, go browse through the library and
I'm sure you're going to find something
fascinating and unique that you won't
find anywhere else. You can sign up at
mubi.com/toomasflight
for an extended 30-day free trial.
That's movie.com/toomasflight
to give it a try for free on me. Check
out Die My Love in theaters or We Need
to Talk About Kevin streaming now.
Again, that's movie.com/toomasflight.
Thanks again to Movie for sponsoring
this video. Thank you so much for
watching this video. If you want to make
future videos possible, you can do that
directly by going to
patreon.com/thomasflight.